Editor’s note: This article was published under the headline “Happy and Glorious” in a special edition of The Economist to mark the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. A CORONATION is the most magnificent ceremony of that most magnificent ceremonial institution, the British Crown. Emphasis has rightly been laid on the religious aspect of Tuesday’s service. But in this twentieth century it is as a secular sacrament that the Coronation will be regarded by the great majority of those who are flocking into London to see it. As the peers of the realm in the Abbey, so the people in their hundreds of thousands in the streets, and in their millions upon millions on the radio, are come to recognise their undoubted Queen and to return loyal homage for her solemn oath. All this, of course, is symbolism. But every society has its symbols, and the believers in constitutional monarchy (who include many of the most intelligent and cultured peoples of the world) can at least claim that their symbols, being alive, are more natural for a human society. This particular coronation, by a unanimity of instinct, is a very special one. Everything conspires to sustain the hope and belief that it formally inaugurates a long and glorious reign. Queens have been lucky for this country, and young queens especially. By name, Her Majesty recalls the magical springtime of Elizabeth I. But the parallel is closer—and equally happy—with Victoria, and either augury gives ample reason to salute Queen Elizabeth II with high hearts and hopes. There is something more than wishful nostalgia in these attempts to recall great ages by echoing great names. For forty years the British people, more than almost any other in the world, have lived in constant crisis and under constant strain. Undoubtedly there is a certain spiritual fatigue. But nothing vital has been lost and if for a generation they could be granted a surcease of alarm, there could be a great resurgence of spirit from a people still basically at one, still rich, still proud and still free. If there is nothing in the present posture of the world to warrant any confidence that such a respite is likely, the events of the last few months have equally shown that there is nothing to forbid the belief that it is possible. And in so doing they have shed their own shy ray of sunshine on the pageantry. Lost in the Coronation excitement, there is an anniversary this weekend that is not wholly irrelevant to the theme. Friday was the five-hundredth anniversary of the fall of Constantinople. And in a few weeks’ time, on July 17th, it will also be half a millennium since the battle of Castillon finally drove the English out of France and brought the Hundred Years’ War to an end. Both events were more the recognition of facts already accomplished than decisive in themselves. But they are none the less serviceable to mark the formal end of the Middle Ages in the eastern and the western marches of Christendom. Indeed, a pretty historical theory can be built around the abundance of anniversaries in these mid-century years. There is, the theory would run, a periodicity in human affairs that lasts about a hundred years, but begins about the middle of the calendar century. About that time, it appears, a new line is struck out, a new guiding principle takes command. For a generation, or sometimes two, it develops in relative tranquillity. But gradually the contradictions, the inner conflicts, the contentious children of tranquillity, begin to appear. The tensions build up, in the early decades of the calendar century, into a time of troubles. But by the middle of the century, the issue that has provoked the conflicts is resolved and the cycle begins again. Thus the Renaissance, after fifty years during which the human mind opened like a gigantic bud, led straight to the Reformation and to the first dreadful round of religious wars. Both in England and on the Continent, a settlement was reached in the 1550s. It took the form of strong national monarchies, which assured enough stability to give England and Spain and (in some respects) Germany their golden ages. Strong monarchies, however, declined after the turn of the century into civil conflict, and the 1640s, with civil war in England, the Fronde in France and the Thirty Years’ War in Germany, were a period of despair. But once again, in the 1650s and the early 1660s, a settlement was reached and though it was on different lines in different countries, it everywhere made possible a great forward surge in human arts and sciences. In the eighteenth century, the pattern is a little less clear. But Watt and Voltaire stand out as the markers of the new direction that the human spirit took, once again, in the middle of the century; indeed, few revolutions have been more decisive than that of which free thinking and technology were the parents. The time of trouble followed very promptly and was prolonged. But it was, once more, in the 1840s and the 1850s that the long liberal summer began. This, in turn, bred its time of troubles, through which we have been living. So we stand once again at the watershed of a century. Of the forces that have been at work in its first half—in the reigns of the four kings who divide the century and separate the two queens—the supplement included with this issue of The Economist attempts to give some account. Of what is still to come, only this can be said with assurance: that the uncertainties and the apprehensions are surely no greater than they must have been at the mid-point of those other centuries, which yet blazed forth so splendidly. This pattern weaving, it will be said, is no more than a piece of historical fiction. That can readily be granted. But is this the day to question the validity of historic fictions, when one of the most transparent of them is about to parade through the streets of London its power to captivate the minds and stir the emotions even of that disillusioned cynic the mid-century Briton? Give us leave to base our aspirations on whatever fancies we may, if they give us joy and courage to face the future. Let us wrap them up in the familiar prayer and cheer ourselves hoarse for the symbols and the fictions, for the banners and the emblems, for the pride of the past, for the warmth of the present and for all the hopes of the future. Send Her Victorious. Happy and Glorious. God Save the Queen. ■